SIMD-0186: Loaded Transaction Data Size Specification (#186)
solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents: proposals/0186-loaded-transaction-data-size-specification.md

For the purposes of this SIMD, we make no assumptions about the contents of the
programdata account.

## Detailed Design

The proposed algorithm is as follows:

1. The set of accounts that determine loaded transaction data size is defined as
the unique intersection of:
    * The set of account keys explicitly specified on the transaction,
irrespective of how they are used.
    * The set of programdata accounts referenced by the LoaderV3 program
accounts specified on the transaction.
2. Each account's size is defined as the byte length of its data prior to
transaction execution plus 64 bytes to account for metadata.
3. There is an additional flat 8248 byte cost for transactions that use an
address lookup table, accounting for the 8192 bytes for the maximum size of such
a table plus 56 bytes for metadata.
4. The total transaction loaded account data size is the sum of these sizes.

Transactions may include a
`ComputeBudgetInstruction::SetLoadedAccountsDataSizeLimit` instruction to define
a lower data size limit for the transaction. Otherwise, the default limit is
64MiB (`64 * 1024 * 1024` bytes).

If a transaction exceeds its data size limit, the transaction is failed. Fees

> will be charged once `enable_transaction_loading_failure_fees` is enabled.

Reviewer: Where will this be checked? Do transactions that fail this check make it into blocks? Do you mind clarifying this in the SIMD? :pray:

Author: ok i updated the wording to:
>If a transaction exceeds its data size limit, a loading failure occurs. This SIMD does not change any aspect of how such a failure is handled. At time of writing, such a transaction would be excluded from the ledger. When enable_transaction_loading_failure_fees is enabled, it will be written to the ledger and charged fees as a processed, failed transaction.

the idea is we arent changing _any_ of the logic about how loading works here, the existing flow stays the same (loading happens at the same time in the same place of transaction processing, what kind of error you get if you exceed the limit, how that error is handled and how its reflected in ledger history, etc)

the only thing that changes is what the number of bytes you arrive at will be and how you determine what that number is

No new terms are introduced by this SIMD, however we define these for clarity:

* Instruction account: an account passed to an instruction in its accounts
array, which allows the program to view the actual bytes contained in the
account. CPI can only happen through programs provided as instruction accounts.
* Transaction accounts list: all accounts for the transaction, which includes
instruction accounts, the fee-payer, program IDs, and any extra accounts added
to the list but not used for any purpose.
* LoaderV3 program account: an account owned by
`BPFLoaderUpgradeab1e11111111111111111111111` which contains in its account data
the first four bytes `02 00 00 00` followed by a pubkey which points to an
account which is defined as the program's programdata account.

For the purposes of this SIMD, we make no assumptions about the contents of the
programdata account.

## Detailed Design

The proposed algorithm is as follows:

1. Given a transaction, take the unique set of account keys which are used as:
    * An instruction account.
    * A program ID for an instruction.
    * The fee-payer.
2. Each account's size is determined solely by the byte length of its data prior

> to transaction execution.

Reviewer 2: iirc, original motivation is primarily focus on memory footprint and how that chunk of memory is used, loading from accountdb and serializing wasn't discussed much then, it might make sense now

> to transaction execution.

Reviewer 3: How about 96 bytes? From https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/4e7f7f76f453e126b171c800bbaca2cb28637535/programs/bpf_loader/src/serialization.rs#L417, I see we have to serialize 3 bytes for `is_writable`, `is_signer`, and `is_executable`, 4 bytes for original data length, 8 bytes each for `data length`, `lamports`, and `rent_epoch`, 32 bytes for the `account_key`, and 32 bytes for the `owner` and we adjust for alignment to the nearest multiple of 8. cc @Lichtso

> to transaction execution.

Reviewer 4: Yes that is the size of the serialized account metadata. But have you thought about the resize / realloc padding (`MAX_PERMITTED_DATA_INCREASE`)?

> to transaction execution.

Reviewer 3: Will that be used in loaderv4 too?

> to transaction execution.

Reviewer 4: Yes, serialization will stay ABIv1 in loader-v4.
ABIv2 is its own [SIMD](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/177).

> to transaction execution.

Author: realloc headroom is quite different conceptually from "loaded data" tho isnt it? space is reserved, but no data is loaded

> to transaction execution.

Reviewer 3: Sounds like we need a (loose?) definition for what loaded data is intended to mean. It could be the amount of bytes read from accounts db (in that case maybe programdata is only counted once?) or it could be roughly the amount of bytes loaded into memory before tx execution?

In either case I think it makes sense to include the account metadata overhead of approx. 64 bytes and exclude the overhead of the account key itself and the realloc buffer since they're not really loaded in any sense.

> to transaction execution.

Author: im equally fine counting programdata once or twice, and after this pr lets us refactor we should only have to actually load it once. main concerns are that the algorithm is very simple implement correctly, and always counts programdata if you use the program

maybe a new definition (counting programdata once) like:
1. Given a transaction, take the unique set of account keys which are used as:
    * An instruction account.
    * A program ID for an instruction.
    * The fee-payer.
2. For all LoaderV3 program accounts, add the key of the programdata account it references to the set of account keys, if it does not already exist.
3. Each account's size is defined as the byte length of its data prior to transaction execution, plus 64 bytes to account for metadata. This is irrespective of how the account is used on the transaction.
4. The total transaction loaded account data size is the sum of these sizes.

> to transaction execution.

Reviewer 3: I'm also fine either way, slight bias to counting it once now if we only need to load it once from accounts-db. Do we agree on 64 bytes overhead?

3. For any `LoaderV3` program account, add the size of the programdata account
it references, if it exists.
4. The total transaction size is the sum of these sizes.

Transactions may include a
`ComputeBudgetInstruction::SetLoadedAccountsDataSizeLimit` instruction to define

> a data size limit for the transaction. Otherwise, the default limit is 64MiB

Reviewer 2: Just fyi, https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/pull/1355 attempted to introduce DEFAULT_LOADED_ACCOUNTS_DATA_SIZE_BYTES. Leader currently used "actual" loaded accounts size after execution in block packing, so a lower DEFAULT is critical atm

> a data size limit for the transaction. Otherwise, the default limit is 64MiB

Author: im definitely on board with reducing the default, but it should be done separately from this simd. after we implement the new algorithm, we can run it against ledger history to collect new data about what transaction sizes would look like with it enabled. calculated sizes will increase nontrivially and we dont want to pick a number that will cause significant breakage

for example, in #1355 2MiB is suggested as a good number that only causes 5% breakage. however, the jupiter v4 program is 2.5MiB and jupiter v6 is close to 3MiB. this means they must be passing their program as an instruction account, which due to the current algorithm, means the program is only counted as 36 bytes. it also means under the new algorithm which properly counts programs, a 2MiB default limit would break 100% of jupiter transactions

once we fix the size calculations, we will be in a better position to judge what the real sizes of transactions actually are

* Instruction account: an account passed to an instruction in its accounts
array, which allows the program to view the actual bytes contained in the
account. CPI can only happen through programs provided as instruction accounts.
* Transaction accounts list: all accounts for the transaction, which includes
instruction accounts, the fee-payer, program IDs, and any extra accounts added
to the list but not used for any purpose.
* LoaderV3 program account: an account owned by
`BPFLoaderUpgradeab1e11111111111111111111111` which contains in its account data
the first four bytes `02 00 00 00` followed by a pubkey which points to an
account which is defined as the program's programdata account.

For the purposes of this SIMD, we make no assumptions about the contents of the
programdata account.

## Detailed Design

The proposed algorithm is as follows:

1. The set of accounts that determine loaded transaction data size is defined as
the unique intersection of:
    * The set of account keys explicitly specified on the transaction,
irrespective of how they are used.
    * The set of programdata accounts referenced by the LoaderV3 program

> accounts specified on the transaction.

Reviewer 3: Oh just realized we should probably also include ALT account sizes as well

Reviewer 3: Hmm but ALTs are not read or write locked by the transaction so they could be extended in parallel so we can't use the actual size. Maybe just use the max size of `LOOKUP_TABLE_META_SIZE + LOOKUP_TABLE_MAX_ADDRESSES * 32`?

Author: is it possible to know whether an ALT was used at all in transaction processing? my understanding is resolution happens too early and all the information is erased. im not sure if there is an easy solution to this or if we should defer adding it to transaction data size after the ALT async execution simd changes how that code works

Reviewer 3: It's possible, we could simply include that information in static meta and make it available to the account loader. The ALT SIMD changes will most likely only really cover failure cases so I don't think we need to defer this decision.

Reviewer 5: If we're just using the max size of a table, we don't need to store any additional information in static meta. We have the number of ALTs in the message itself.

and I (accidently) have already exposed getting that information in `SVMMessage` trait, so we should be able to get it in our specific implementation easily.

Author: (based on discussion we are considering a flat 8192 byte cost for ALT usage, pending feedback from @tao-stones)

Reviewer 3: > (based on discussion we are considering a flat 8192 byte cost for ALT usage ...

Should be 8248 byte cost because there is space in the ALT accounts for 56 bytes of metadata as well

Reviewer 2: `8248 * 8 / 32000 = 2 CU`, that doesn't sound bad at all.

Reviewer 3: Cool, let's go forward with that in the proposal for now then

Transactions may include a
`ComputeBudgetInstruction::SetLoadedAccountsDataSizeLimit` instruction to define
a lower data size limit for the transaction. Otherwise, the default limit is
64MiB (`64 * 1024 * 1024` bytes).

If a transaction exceeds its data size limit, the transaction is failed. Fees
will be charged once `enable_transaction_loading_failure_fees` is enabled.

Adding required loaders to transaction data size is abolished. They are treated
the same as any other account: counted if used in a manner described by 1, not
counted otherwise.

No account that falls outside of the three categories listed by 1 is counted
against transaction data size. Validator clients are free to decline to load
them.

Read-only and writable accounts are treated the same. In the future, when direct
mapping is enabled, this SIMD may be amended to count them differently.

As a consequence of 1 and 3, for LoaderV3 programs, programdata is counted twice
if a transaction explicitly references the program account and its programdata
account. This is done partly for simplicity, and partly to account for the cost
of maintaining the compiled program in addition to the actual bytes of

> the programdata account.

Reviewer 3: I think we settled on just counting them once right?

Author: yes i forgot to delete this

be amended to define the required semantics before LoaderV4 is enabled on any
network.

## Alternatives Considered

* Transaction data size accounting is already enabled, so the null option is to
enshrine the current Agave behavior in the protocol. This is undesirable because
the current behavior is highly idiosyncratic, and LoaderV3 program sizes are
routinely undercounted.
* Builtin programs are backed by accounts that only contain the program name as
a string, typically making them 15-40 bytes. We could impose a larger fixed cost
for these. However, they must be made available for all programs anyway, and
most of them are likely to be ported to BPF eventually, so this adds complexity
for no real benefit.
* Several slightly different algorithms were considered for handling LoaderV3
programs in particular, for instance only counting programs that are valid for
execution in the current slot. However, this would implicitly couple transaction
data size with the results of ELF validation, which is highly undesirable.
* We considered loading and counting sizes for accounts on the transaction
account list which are not used for any purpose. This is the current behavior,

> but there is no reason to load such accounts at all.

Reviewer 3: This section is no longer relevant

account data required by the transaction.

## New Terminology

No new terms are introduced by this SIMD, however we define these for clarity:

* Instruction account: an account passed to an instruction in its accounts
array, which allows the program to view the actual bytes contained in the
account. CPI can only happen through programs provided as instruction accounts.
* Transaction accounts list: all accounts for the transaction, which includes
instruction accounts, the fee-payer, program IDs, and any extra accounts added
to the list but not used for any purpose.
* LoaderV3 program account: an account owned by
`BPFLoaderUpgradeab1e11111111111111111111111` which contains in its account data
the first four bytes `02 00 00 00` followed by a pubkey which points to an
account which is defined as the program's programdata account.

For the purposes of this SIMD, we make no assumptions about the contents of the
programdata account.

## Detailed Design

The proposed algorithm is as follows:

1. Given a transaction, take the unique set of account keys which are used as:
    * An instruction account.
    * A program ID for an instruction.

>     * The fee-payer.

Reviewer 3: We may have to include every account in the transaction actually if this SIMD is accepted: https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/163 (cc @Lichtso)

Reviewer 4: Yes, it is generally bad to try to have extra conditions for TX account depending on how they are used. That is how we got to the write lock demotion and only top-level-instructions counting loader-v3 programdata account mess we have.

Author: cool, ill revert that change

also i love this simd, i was thinking the other week it would be so nice if you could specify accounts you might want to execute but dont need to see instruction data for

Reviewer 5: Nice catch!

> 2. Each account's size is determined solely by the byte length of its data prior
> to transaction execution, irrespective of it is used on the transaction.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Add each account's size, which is determined solely by the byte length of its data prior
to transaction execution, irrespective of how it is used on the transaction.
```

> 3. For any loaded account identified as a `LoaderV3` program account, add the
> size of the programdata account it references to its own size, irrespective of
> how the program account is used on the transaction.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. For any loaded account identified as a `LoaderV3` program account, add the
size of the programdata account it references, irrespective of
how the program account is used in the transaction.
```

> 4. The total transaction size is the sum of these sizes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. The total transaction loaded account data size is the sum of these sizes.
```
